# A Modest Proposal for Solving the IT Crisis

In spite of the recent GenAI breakthroughs the problem of not enough software teams to build all the solutions that the business world needs will remain. We need to combine GenAI with other changes to the way software development is done. In this article I'll argue that the way to address this is for the Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) to build their own solutions via various forms of *self-service*. I define self-service as the ability of the SMEs to create *executable solutions* in their domain of expertise without the IT team. The *solution* can be as simple as getting access to existing data to create new data, or as elaborate as building a new application. The [Subject Matter First Manifesto](https://subjectmatterfirst.org/) quoted below, establishes the justification for this: 

> Subject matter experts own the expertise at the core of software. But too often this rich expertise is not captured in a structured way and gets lost when translating it for software developers.  With the rate of change increasing and product variability blooming, putting knowledge into software in this way is increasingly untenable. It causes delays, quality problems and frustration for everybody involved.
>
> We advocate for putting SMEs directly in control of “their” part of the software and letting developers focus on software engineering.

Few have credibly attained this kind of *SME self-service* and there is little agreement on how attain it: low-code/no-code, drag-and-drop UIs, AI/ML, Citizen Data Scientists, and now GenAI.

GenAI is absolutely capable of generating code. Such Large Language Model based generation of enough *code* to produce a solution, even if done one small step at a time, isn't the answer for enabling SMEs. The problem is it's *code* and that isn't the language of the SME. They not only need to understand that code, they need to test it, and almost always evolve it. It can't be the kind of code that software teams have used to date. Because of the loss of SME knowledge in translation problem mentioned above, this approach can't accelerate the work of developers enough to have the big impacts we need.  

How can we get the big self-service breakthrough we need by building on the GenAI breakthroughs? We need to change what GenAI produces to be in a *language* that SMEs can work with. GenAI needs to generate a Domain Specific Language (DSL). A DSL is the formalization of the language the SMEs use to describe the problems and their solutions of their domain.

Formalizing the language means we work with the Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) of the domain to define the structure and syntax of the ubiquitous language.  The syntax is built on existing notations and conventions used in the domain, e.g., text, tables, symbols, and diagrams, not just lots of keywords and curly braces. It requires becoming very clear – formal! – about the concepts that go into the language. In fact, building the language, because of the need for formalization, helps you become clear about the concepts of the domain in the first place. The benefits of the approach happen right away because language definition acts as a catalyst for understanding the domain![^Markus-adapted]
With a SME self-service architecture based on the domain language we eliminate all the mis-communication between the business and IT. The right *solutions* will be built because the SMEs won't make mistakes on what to build. These mistakes happen all to frequently in a standard IT software dev cycle. I won't repeat the detailed exploration of the justification of the approach, instead you should invest a few minutes to read the full [Subject Matter First Manifesto](https://subjectmatterfirst.org/).

